+++
type = "article"
title = "Working with resources using xres"
date = "2016-01-22T10:18:40.000Z"
tags = ["resource", "xres", "listres", "resattr"]
+++

This article explains how to manipulate resources of a binary file such as an executable using the <code>xres</code> command. Although <code>listres</code> can also work with resources, <code>xres</code> makes it superfluous.
<!--break-->
To extract resources from a binary file, say <code>HaikuDepot</code>, into a resources file <code>HaikuDepot.rsrc</code>, run the <code>xres</code> command like this:
<pre class="terminal">~> xres -o HaikuDepot.rsrc HaikuDepot</pre>

If the binary file contains resources, the output file will be created (or overwritten if it already exists). Otherwise, the output file will be <em>neither</em> created <em>nor</em> touched (if already exists).

To list the resources of a binary or resources file, use the <code>-l</code> switch like this:
<pre class="terminal">
~> xres -l HaikuDepot

HaikuDepot resources:

 type           ID        size  name
------ ----------- -----------  --------------------
'MIMS'           1          35  BEOS:APP_SIG
'CSTR'           1          46  SYS:NAME
'APPF'           1           4  BEOS:APP_FLAGS
'MSGG'           1         134  BEOS:FILE_TYPES
'VICN'         101        1283  BEOS:ICON
'VICN'         501          54  star
'VICN'         502         119  thumbs up
'VICN'         503         119  thumbs down
'VICN'         504          71  installed
'APPV'           1         680  BEOS:APP_VERSION
</pre>

(You can also use the <code>listres</code> command to list the resources of a file.)

To add resources from a resources file to a binary file, we can again use the <code>-o</code> switch:
<pre class="terminal">~> xres -o HaikuDepot HaikuDepot.rsrc</pre>

There is no direct way to test whether a binary file contains resources because when listing or extracting resources, both <code>xres</code> and <code>listres</code> will return the status code 0 either way. However, you can indirectly test it using <code>xres</code> as demonstrated in the example below.

The following shell script is a good example of how to use <code>xres</code> to back up and restore resources of a binary file. This is necessary because the <code>strip --strip-debug</code> command will remove debugging symbols <em>and</em> the resources section.
<blockcode>
#!/bin/sh

rm -fr HaikuDepot.rsrc
xres -o HaikuDepot.rsrc HaikuDepot        # save resources from HaikuDepot into HaikuDepot.rsrc
strip --strip-debug HaikuDepot

if [ -e HaikuDepot.rsrc ]; then           # test the existence of HaikuDepot.rsrc
    xres -o HaikuDepot HaikuDepot.rsrc    # restore saved resources into HaikuDepot
    rm HaikuDepot.rsrc
fi
</blockcode>