+++
type = "article"
title = "Creating Patches"
date = "2009-05-21T03:08:25.000Z"
tags = []
+++

<p>Currently Haiku's sources are contained with a Subversion Repository, sometimes referred to as svn. Svn comes with built in support for many features, namely creating patches. Creating patches is useful for an individual person to isolate portions of code that have been modified. Those patches can then be retained as a backup of one's own work or primarily, to send to the developers to be reviewed and hopefully accepted to the repository. </p>


The most simplest usage of diff, albeit of limited use is 
<pre>
cd /path/svn_repository
svn diff
</pre>
This will recursively examine /path/svn_repository for any files that have been modified. It will then output those changes to screen. Typically, you will want to run diff a particular file or folder. 
<pre>
cd /path/haiku
svn diff path/to/file_or_directory &gt; ~/filename.patch
</pre>
The Haiku developers prefer all patches to be created from the top level of one's local svn tree, which is typically /path/haiku. In the above example, the output from `svn diff` is redirected to the file /boot/home/filename.patch.  "~/filename.patch" can be any file in any directory. However, many people find it convenient to place patches in the home folder. 
<ul>
For those new to command line redirection, 
<li>"&gt;" will output to a new file or overwrite the pre-existing file</li>
<li>"&gt;&gt;" will append the new information at the end of the pre-existing file</li>
</ul>

<p>If you happen to forget which files you have modified, `svn stat` can be used. See the output of `svn help stat` for more information.</p>