+++
type = "blog"
author = "5081"
title = "Request for comment: A built-in \"search to launch\" feature for Haiku?"
date = "2013-01-21T22:47:24.000Z"
tags = []
+++

Most operating systems and desktops are moving to the "search to launch" style of starting applications.  After using these for a while, I do think they speed up my core desktop usage.

I also think everyone is doing it wrong. Below are my general thoughts on this kind of application launcher:

<ul>
 <li><b>Search to launch shouldn't distract the user.</b>
 <p>Gnome 3, Windows 8, and Unity. All of these user interfaces distract you from your work by bringing up a full-screen launcher. While I think some focus is needed on the "search to launch" interface, it should only distract you enough to let you think about what you want to start.</p></li>
 <li><b>Search to launch shouldn't search files on the disk.<b>
 <p>Haiku has a wonderful gui file search application, lets not try to mesh Applications and Files<p></li>
 <li><b>Search to launch shouldn't replace the traditional desktop experience</b>
 <p>The desktop had a long time to evolve to what it was. Haiku has put a large amount of work into the Tracker resulting in a fast and stable method to manage your desktop.</p></li>
</ul>

After some discussion in IRC, many seem open to investigating some of kind of "search to launch" feature for Haiku.  The general consensus in IRC was that the best user experience would come from a hot key to bring up the "search to launch" dialog / window.  Here you could begin typing the name of a known application from the application menu and press enter to launch it.

Humdinger has actually already made such an application on Haikuware that seems to cover most of these items. The name of the application is QuickLaunch. (here http://haikuware.com/remository/view-details/utilities/desktop-accessories/quicklaunch)

I wanted to post this to get a feeling from the community on how people would react to such an addition.