+++
type = "blog"
author = "PulkoMandy"
title = "Haiku monthly activity report - 02/2019"
date = "Sat, 2 Mar 2019 11:52:44 +0100"
tags = []
+++

Welcome to the activity report for February 2019. This month has been quite busy
for me with the annual visit to FOSDEM (<a href="/conference/2019_fosdem_2019/">read the report</a>), and managing the application
process for both GSoC and Outreachy (Haiku has been <a href="/news/2019-02-26_haiku_gets_into_gsoc_and_outreachy/">accepted to both programs</a> this year).

We are already seeing candidates applying to both GSoC and Outreachy, so expect
to read about new names in the reports in the coming months and during the summer!

Anyway, let's see what happened to the sourcecode while I was busy with this!
This report covers hrev52828-hrev52944.

<h3>Media Kit</h3>

CodeForEvolution implemented BSound::Duration.

Barrett continues his work on improving the media kit, with various cleanup and
initial work on support for DVD playback as well as improvements to the existing
HTTP and RTSP streamers.

<h3>ELF loader</h3>

Waddlesplash completed the work on support for new format of initialization tables
in ELF files. These tables are generated by the compiler and lets the OS know
what needs to be initialized before the main() function can be called. The most
basic ones are just clearing memory to 0, but sometimes, a global variable is
set to a specific value, or a global or static C++ object is created, for example.

There are various ways for the compiler to list these, and mixing them together
is a little tricky, as we require some initializations to happen after others.

This led to changes to the runtime_loader, but eventually led to more cleanups
in other places, as the support code for this was also used in other unrelated
code (to identify the object file some code was compiled in and locate matching
resources, for example).

<h3>User interface</h3>

Rob Gill fixed the "autoraise" deskbar replicant, a little helper application
that allows to raise windows to front automatically when using focus follows mouse.

He also fixed the icon size for ProcessController replicant.

Waddlesplash improved the interaction between scrollbars and layout system, allowing
views to specify if they know how to handle scrolling themselves, in case the
default behavior of scrolling 1 pixel at a time over a fixed range is not appropriate.

PulkoMandy fixed drawing of B_GRAY1 (monochrome) bitmaps, as part of his effort
to implement a driver for old Apple StyleWriter printers which work with such bitmaps.

Zach Dykstra fixed the file information dialog in Tracker, which had truncated text.

<h3>Code cleanups</h3>

mt started continued his cleanup work, reviewing issues from the PVS studio scan
we ran a few years ago, and fixing some of the problems found there. He is also
working on cleaning up all 'class-memaccess' warnings, where we use memset on
C++ objects.

Rob Gill joined the effort and also identified and fixed various other small issues
in several parts of the codebase.

Some Coverity issues were fixed by puckipedia, as well.

PulkoMandy made WebPositive abort cleanly with an error message if SSE2 is not
available. Unfortunately, the current versions of WebKit really can't be made
to run without SSE2. Our users still runnning older CPUs can use NetSurf or other
alternative web browsers.

Waddlesplash worked towards removing some of the multiple hash table implementations
we have accumulated over the years (some being derivatives of each other).

Thanks to jscipione, the MIDI player will not crash when you drop a file on it
while it's already playing.

<h3>Storage and filesystems</h3>

The BFS resizing code developped during GSoC 2012 is finally getting some attention,
with a few cleanup commits being merged this month. It does not result in anything
usable yet, but at least the code is up for review on Gerrit now.

The more recent code for the SD/MMC drivers from GSoC 2018 is also being worked
on, the issue that was left pending at the end of GSoC was fixed, allowing the
bus driver to work and identify SD cards, now the work on the actual mass storage
driver remains.

korli fixed issues in the exfat driver that would lead to crashes on large drives
(2TB or more). There are still some issues but at least it won't bring the whole
system down.

As part of the code cleanups mentionned above, btrfs, bfs and ext2 all got some
fixes to avoid crashes in unexpected situations.

Fabiano Fidêncio modified our build scripts to make sure our ISO images have
an useful ISO volume identifier, allowing them to be identified by GNOME and
other Linux tools.

<h3>POSIX compatibility</h3>

korli improved the implementation of the posix_spawn function, which is a
relatively recent addition to POSIX to fix the performance problems with the
traditional way of starting a new application (fork() then exec()). The traditional
way is to copy the current application, and then replace it with the one to
execute. It is not so nice to copy something and erase it immediately afterwards.
Note that BeOS already had a solution similar to posix_spawn, which we also
implement, but posix_spawn is a more flexible function, allowing to control
various aspects (session IDs, file descriptors inheritance, etc).

<h3>Applications and tools</h3>

SerialConnect now has a larger scrollback, allowing for example to see the complete
output from Haiku serial logs on another machine.

Rob Gill also made several small fixes, such as preventing BootManager to offer
installation to read-only drives, making printer preferences close with the
usual alt+W shortcut, etc.

WebPositive got some attention as well, with an option to restore the previous session
when opening, and a way to select the download folder using a BFilePanel. Thanks
to Rob Gill, humdinger and for working on this together!

Yatendra Singh made it possible to autostart LaunchBox on boot.

<h3>Bootstrap and new ports</h3>

kallisti5 and PulkoMandy have been working on bootstrapping Haiku on RISC-V and 
SPARC hardware, respectively. These ports were started because the ARM port is
currently having problems linking ICU, and we wanted to check if we would hit
similar problems on other architectures.

The choice of these two was made for various reasons, including hardware availability
(someone donated me a SPARC machine), availability of specifications (both are
specified by open, independant entities and have multiple manufacturers implementing them),
tool support (both have well maintained support in GCC), and personal interests
of people doing the work.

The two new ports are not in an usable state yet, but they allow to once again
review the whole bootstrap procedure and identify (or ideally, fix) any problem
hit along the way.

<h3>USB support</h3>

Waddlesplash made several changes to the USB3 driver, to fix various issues on
a wide set of hardware. The driver is now much more stable and compatible,
however a few regressions have been spotted too. We encourage you to test USB3
support on nightlies from time to time and report bugs if you encounter some
problems.

<h3>Video drivers</h3>

kallisti5 fixed a crash in the VESA driver when there is no video card. This
allows to boot Haiku a bit further on Google Compute nodes. However, the app_server
is in turn not so happy to not find a loaded video driver.

mmu_man made the VESA driver also disable screen scaling on NVidia hardware, so
that the screen will use the native pixel size and have black borders around it,
rather than using a blury and ugly scaling.
