+++
type = "conference"
title = "FOSDEM 2018"
date = "2018-01-21T18:40:20.000Z"
tags = []
[event]
start = "2018-02-03"
end = "2018-02-04"
homepage = "https://fosdem.org/2018/"
country = "Belgium"
+++

FOSDEM is a free and non-commercial event organised by the community for the community. The goal is to provide free and open source software developers and communities a place to meet to:

* get in touch with other developers and projects;
* be informed about the latest developments in the free software world;
* be informed about the latest developments in the open source world;
* attend interesting talks and presentations on various topics by project leaders and committers;
* to promote the development and benefits of free software and open source solutions.


Participation and attendance is *totally* free, though the organisers gratefully accept donations and sponsorship.

---

* Event Dates: 2018-02-03 - 2018-02-04
* Event Homepage: [https://fosdem.org/2018/](https://fosdem.org/2018/)

## Location

ULB Campus Solbosch<br/>
50 Avenue Franklin D. Roosevelt<br/>
Brussels 1050<br/>
Belgium<br/>

## Event report:

For several years Haiku is somehow present at FOSDEM. This has not always been
simple. The event is very crowded and the organizers have to make difficult
choices in which talks and booths to accept. Some years, we had neither and
mmu\_man had to advertize Haiku as a "sandwich man", wearing ads and demoing on
an hand-held laptop.

Eventually we found a compromise by sharing a booth wih our friends from ReactOS.
Since we are both small projects, we are happy enough to get half the space.
This is what we had done last year and what was planned this year, however, when
we got to the event place this year we found out that we had been upgraded to
a full-size table!

Our booth was between ReactOS and Python, so we discussed issues with our Python
port and eventually I debugged our Python 3 port. This was the opportunity to
continue the work on porting Poezio that I had started a few month back at the
Capitole du Libre. I could also report my progress and problems to the Poezio
developers, even if they can't help much with problems in Python and missing
dependencies.

This year there were several interesting talks, between the "history" track
(with one talk about the continuous history of UNIX since the early 70s to
current versions of FreeBSD - now all available in a single git repo to track
everything, and another about the alternatives to UNIX that did not meet such great
success). Between the talks we also took turns to hold the booth and show Haiku
to visitors (and give away stickers). People attending were mmu\_man, oco, kapix and PulkoMandy.

KapiX gave a talk about his work porting LibreOffice to Haiku. The LibreOffice
people were very interested about his work and happy to see someone managing
their buildsystem and the internals of their code. He could then discuss this
further with them and set up a plan for sharing more code between platforms and
upstreaming his work.

Oco gave a talk (not directly related to Haiku) about his work writing UEFI
applications using the FreePascal compiler. This gave an overview of how an
UEFI binary is structured and an example of making an "hello world" program in
Pascal. As is often the case at FOSDEM, the room was completely full with a lot 
of people interested in the subject.

On saturday evening, there was a private event for GSoC and GCI mentors/students.
We went there with Kapix while Oco and mmu\_man joined another groups of FOSDEM
hackers for dinner.

On sunday, the schedule was a bit complicated. This year there was a new "retrocomputing"
devroom, started after mmu\_man talk about retro things in 2017. However, the
devroom manager could not attend FOSDEM and asked mmu\_man if he could take the
role. But, mmu\_man had to catch his train during the afternoon so eventually
PulkoMandy replaced him, and there was no one left to clean up our booth (which
has to happen rather quickly on sunday evening, in order to leave the room back
to its normal university usage on the next day).

Still, there was some time for nice discussions, lolliwaffles (waffles on a
stick with chocolate), and a lot of fun overall. We were also personally invited
to attend RMLL in Strasbourg this summer by the main organizer.

