+++
type = "conference"
title = "FOSDEM 2019"
date = "2018-11-28T00:00:00.000Z"
tags = []
[event]
start = "2019-02-02"
end = "2019-02-03"
homepage = "https://fosdem.org/2019/"
country = "Belgium"
+++

FOSDEM is a free and non-commercial event organised by the community for the community. The goal is to provide free and open source software developers and communities a place to meet to:

* get in touch with other developers and projects;
* be informed about the latest developments in the free software world;
* be informed about the latest developments in the open source world;
* attend interesting talks and presentations on various topics by project leaders and committers;
* to promote the development and benefits of free software and open source solutions.


Participation and attendance is *totally* free, though the organisers gratefully accept donations and sponsorship.

---

* Event Dates: 2019-02-02 - 2019-02-03
* Event Homepage: [https://fosdem.org/2019/](https://fosdem.org/2019/)
* Activities:
  * Haiku demo at the booth, handing out stickers and CDs
  * A talk in the *Hardware Enablement* devroom: [Will you boot Haiku, on a non intel platform, no BIOS winter?](https://fosdem.org/2019/schedule/event/hardware_boot_haiku/) (Sunday, 10:30)


## Location

ULB Campus Solbosch<br/>
50 Avenue Franklin D. Roosevelt<br/>
Brussels 1050<br/>
Belgium<br/>

## Event report:

Once again the Haiku team assembled for FOSDEM. It is the largest open source
conference, so we have to be there! And it's great meeting the other people too.

This year the booth was run by mmu\_man, oco and PulkoMandy. We had visits from
korli, KapiX, puckipedia, roptat and Charlie Clark as well. It's nice to see
this much Haiku contributors around!

We were just next to the Debian table where they were selling a lot of goodies,
so we had a lot of people look at Haiku while waiting for them to be available.

For the first time, we had DVDs to sell! (if you missed the opportunity, don't
worry, you can also contact PulkoMandy for an online order). The DVDs sold quite
well, almost refunding the manufacturing costs. We hope to do that and have some
benefit left after JDLL in april.

We got the usual visit from people who never heard about Haiku, but this year
we also had people who tried to install it, some with success, other asking
for help with their laptop. We also had visits from friends of Benoit Shillings,
as well as one developer who once worked on GoBe Productive.

The FreeBSD fundation kindly offered us one of their promotional beachballs, to
celebrate our reuse of the FreeBSD network drivers. Unfortunately we were quite
busy at the booth and had little time to chat with them (or visit much of the
other tables).

mmu\_man gave a talk about the struggles with porting Haiku to new hardware.
Unfortunately, video problems delayed the talk by 15 minutes, leaving not much
time for questions (FOSDEM schedule is incredibly packed and tolerates no delays,
so it was not possible to steal time from the following talk). The room was
quite full, as usual with FOSDEM (there is really a lot of people attending).

We ran the usual demo on mmu\_man's antique Pentium M with 200MB of RAM. People
are starting to complain a lot about this, so maybe we should consider an update
of our demo machine (I have some candidate laptops for this).
